Review compositor tutorial (#3606)
canonical/mir: doc/sphinx/tutorial/write-your-first-wayland-compositor.md

discourse: 4911,5164,5603,6756,8037
---

# Write your first Wayland compositor
This tutorial will guide you through writing a basic Mir compositor. By the end of it, you will create, build, and run a program with basic window management
capabilities such as controlling multiple windows, minimizing and maximizing, and handling mouse input. 

This section will cover the needed dependencies and how to install them, the
minimum code needed for a Mir compositor, how to build this code, and finally

> how to run your compositor.

Reviewer: I feel like these two paragraphs overlap a bit too much? I think only lines 5-7 are ncessary.

Reviewer 2: Mostly agree. ("This section will cover the needed dependencies and how to install them." should move)

> This section will cover the needed dependencies and how to install them, the
> minimum code needed for a Mir compositor, how to build this code, and finally
> how to run your compositor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Assumptions

This tutorial assumes that:

* You are familiar with C++ and CMake.
* You have `cmake` and a C++ compiler installed.

## Installing dependencies

> 

Reviewer 2: This section will cover the needed dependencies and how to install them.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section will cover the needed dependencies and how to install them.
```

The example program requires 

> * `libmiral`- a library for Mir abstraction layer

Reviewer: Some suggestions: (looks like I misclicked something when starting the review :))

> * `libmiral`- a library for Mir abstraction layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `libmiral` - short for "Mir Abstraction Layer". Provides a high level interface to interact with and customize Mir compositors.
```

> * `mir-graphics-drivers-desktop` - a display server 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `mir-graphics-drivers-desktop` - provides drivers so Mir can talk with different graphics drivers
```

Install dependencies on Debian or derivatives:
```sh
sudo apt install libmiral-dev mir-graphics-drivers-desktop
```

<details>

> <summary> Installing Dependencies on Other Distros </summary>

Reviewer: This is inconsistent between this PR and #3605. I think hiding other distros might be better as to not overwhelm readers, but I'm open to other opinions.

> Instal dependencies on Fedora:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install dependencies on Fedora:
```

```sh
sudo dnf install mir-devel libxkbcommon
```
Install dependencies on Alpine:
```sh
sudo apk add mir-dev
```
</details>

## Coding a Mir compositor

> The following code which defines a barebone Mir compositor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code defines a barebones Mir compositor:
```

}
```

> `MirRunner` is a class from the `libmiral` library that that provides a  high level interface for  Mir.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MirRunner` is a class from `libmiral` that acts as the "entry point" of your compositor.
```

> `MirRunner runner` calls `run_with()` which specifies different fucntions of the composer. In this example, `run_with()` evokes a function `set_window_management_policy` that applies `MinimalWindowManager` policy to `runner`. The composer is therefore created with basic window management capabilities such as controlling multiple windows, minimizing and maximizing, and handling mouse input. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`MirRunner runner` creates a `runner` object that can be used to configure your compositor.  To run the compositor you call `runner.run_with(...)` which specifying different functions of the composer. In this example, `run_with()` is passed a function `set_window_management_policy` that applies `MinimalWindowManager` policy to `runner`. The composer is therefore created with basic window management capabilities such as controlling multiple windows, minimizing and maximizing, and handling mouse input. 
```

Reviewer: +1 on both comments, my version would be something like:

```suggestion
`MirRunner runner` creates a `runner` object that can be used to configure your compositor.  To run the compositor you call `runner.run_with(...)`, passing in different components to customize the behavior of the compositor. In this example, `run_with()` is passed a function `set_window_management_policy` that applies a `MinimalWindowManager` policy to the compositor. The compositor is therefore created with basic window management capabilities such as controlling multiple windows, minimizing and maximizing, and handling mouse input. 
```

> Through this syntax, you can add different functionality to the conposer such as different onscreen keyboards, screen capture, pointer confinement, and so on. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Through the `runner`, you can add different functionality to the composer: enabling onscreen keyboards, screen capture, pointer confinement, and so on. 
```

> ## Building a Mir composer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building a Mir compositor
```

target_link_libraries(     demo-mir-compositor               ${XKBCOMMON_LIBRARIES})
```

Then build it:
```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build
```

## Running a Mir compositor
You can run a compositor nested in an X or Wayland session, or from a virtual terminal, just like the demo applications in [Getting started with Mir](getting-started-with-mir.md). 

For example, to run inside an existing Wayland session:
```sh
WAYLAND_DISPLAY=wayland-99 ./build/demo-mir-compositor
```
An all-black window with the compositor will pop up.

To change the black background of the window and display some content instead, open another terminal and run:
```sh
WAYLAND_DISPLAY=wayland-99 bomber
```

> Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and minimazing it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your compositor. You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and restoring it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your compositor. You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.
```

target_link_libraries(     demo-mir-compositor               ${XKBCOMMON_LIBRARIES})
```

Then build it:
```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build
```

> ## Running a Mir composer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running a Mir compositor
```

> You can run a composer nested in an X or Wayland session, or from a virtual terminal, just like the demo applications in [Getting started with Mir](learn-what-mir-can-do.md). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run a compositor nested in an X or Wayland session, or from a virtual terminal, just like the demo applications in [Getting started with Mir](getting-started-with-mir.md). 
```

For example, to run inside an existing Wayland session:
```sh

> WAYLAND_DISPLAY=wayland-99 ./build/demo-mir-compositor

Reviewer: Usually, Wayland compositors use `wayland-0` (or `wayland-1`, `wayland-2`, ... if you're running multiple compositors). This is used as the name of the compositor's socket which two compositors cannot share (as far as I know). So `wayland-99` is just a convention we use in the team to not have to worry about that.

```

> An all-black window with the compositor will pop up. Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and minimazing it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your composer. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An all-black window with the compositor will pop up.
```

To change the black background of the window and display some content instead, open another terminal and run:
```sh
WAYLAND_DISPLAY=wayland-99 bomber
```

> Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and minimazing it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your composer. You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and minimazing it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your compositor. You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.
```

> You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try moving it around the screen, maximizing and minimazing it. This functionality is provided by the `MinimalWindowManager` policy that you have added to your composer. You can replace `bomber` with any other Wayland-compatible application.
```
